author: Marcin
disqus_id: df4eabee-8e59-4da8-9c49-a46a8cda266a
disqus_url: http://www.tssci-security.com/archives/2007/05/09/20-years-old-and-in-security-part-1/
mod_date: 2007-05-09 14:58:54
parent: 0
post_id: 222
post_type: post
pub_date: 2007-05-09 14:58:54
public: 'yes'
slug: 20-years-old-and-in-security-part-1
tags:
- School
- Security
- Work
template: post.html
title: 20 years old and [in] security (part 1)

20 years old and [in] security (part 1)
#######################################

A
`thread <http://community.securitycatalyst.com/forums/index.php/topic,204.0.html>`_
that has gotten some attention and even sparked some bloggers to tag
each other with their own stories, I thought I'd post my own "how I got
started." I'm twenty years old and my area of study since I graduated
high school has been network security. I wasn't always into network
security, in fact, up until later half of high school I didn't care for
computers much if at all.

I loved to ride bikes -- especially bmx, hitting dirt jumps and grinding
some rails, causing trouble for security guards, etc. I was pretty good
at it and didn't know what I'd do if it wasn't for my bike riding. In
ninth grade though, I broke my leg while fooling around doing some
tricks; fibula, tibia, and ankle all in one shot. This put me on
crutches for a good four months, and I had no idea what to do with
myself... So I took up computer gaming.

Having just hooked up cable internet at my house, my friend Luke turned
me onto Counter-Strike. We played for hours at a time -- gaming became
an addiction. I wanted faster hardware, so I started doing research
online for a new processor, motherboard, graphics card, etc. I started
overclocking my system, wanting more and more from it. Instead of
gaming, I started playing benchmarks like 3DMark2001 just for fun, to
see how high I could get my score.

In tenth grade (2001), I tried out Linux for the first time. I think it
was Red Hat 7.3 that I installed on my old IBM Aptiva 200MMX. What's
funny about this machine when we first got it back in 1996, a couple
weeks later my father came home from work and asked me if I wanted to
try out some operating system called Red Hat Linux. I replied "nah dad,
everyone runs Windows and we should stick with that." Heh, I kinda wish
I went with it and tried it... who knows what I'd be doing today??
Anyways, I used to frequent car forums and one day a girl posted asking
us to vote for her in some bikini competition. Well, Chad and I took a
look at the code behind the poll and in five minutes we had a BASH
script voting a hundred times a second for her. Within a half hour, the
girl went from last place to first by a huge margin. The guys on the
forum thought it was them that inflated her results, but we just kept it
to ourselves. It was pretty cool and funny at the time.

By now I started my junior year of high school, and my first year of
Cisco Networking Academy Program (the second year it was offered at my
school). We had five Cisco 2501 routers and two Cisco Catalyst 1900
switches to play with, along a bunch of old 386's running Windows 98.
What a drag, but we managed.

In my senior year, the classroom had a wall put up in the middle and we
moved our lab across the hall in the tech ed teacher's old office. We
had newer (486's) computers from the computer typing class and we
installed Windows 2000 on them. Our school IT administrator had a shit
fit when he found out it was a pirated copy, and made us uninstall it
and put legal copies back on. We thought he was going to have a stroke
right there, his vein in his forehead popping out and face all red and
sweating. LOL, take it easy buddy!

Two weeks later, our teacher said he had some "bad news" for us, and our
lab was being turned into an in-school suspension area. This meant all
our hard work setting it up had to be torn down and moved back into the
original but now cramped classroom. Once we settled back in, we had
balsa wood houses from the architecture classes sitting on top of our
routers and computers. Morale hit an all time low in the class, everyone
was burnt out from the recent events. I didn't want to touch another
computer again. The rest of my senior year in Cisco Academy wasted away
while I did what I had to do to just "get by." I never did take the CCNA
afterwards. I regret that a lot.

Part Two will detail college life and what I've currently been doing.
