author: dre
disqus_id: 91d1cbe7-9f6a-4c36-8bdb-812f49265d5d
disqus_url: http://www.tssci-security.com/archives/2008/06/19/rip-cissp/
mod_date: 2008-06-19 14:57:40
parent: 0
post_id: 409
post_type: post
pub_date: 2008-06-19 14:57:40
public: 'yes'
slug: rip-cissp
tags:
- Security
- Work
template: post.html
title: R.I.P. CISSP

R.I.P. CISSP
############

We all know about the CISSP. You've heard the whispered hallway
conversations. You've seen the business cards, the email signatures, and
the government contract requirements. You might even know the secret
handshake, or have the magical letters attached to your name somewhere
yourself.

Alternatively, you may despise what it has done to the IT security
industry and community. I do not despise it, and while I embrace it in
concept (I'm not a CISSP, by the way) -- I have to agree that it has
outlived its usefulness as a technical measure of capability. Special
note: this is a very bad thing and it needs attention. No show of hands
necessary.

Not all of the CISSP has been bad. It's given our industry a way to
measure strong analyst level skills with information security concepts.
Some claim there are benefits in the CBOK and ethics charter -- although
these have been debated into nothingness over the years, with no
innovations or improvements made. While some may argue that the CISSP
was DOA, no one can dispute the fact that the CISSP's ability to deliver
is currently MIA.

Wait, you're a CISA? Wait, you are a <insert other IT security
certification here>? You'll also want to read on because this is also
referring to you.

**Specialist or Generalist: Pick one. Woops, you're too slow**

I read `Dan Geer's keynote at SOURCE
Boston <http://geer.tinho.net/geer.sourceboston.txt>`_ a few weeks ago,
and a few things hit me. Near the end, he says:

    Only people in this room will understand what I am now going to say.
    It is this: Security is perhaps the most difficult intellectual
    profession on the planet. The core knowledge base has reached the
    point where new recruits can no longer hope to be competent
    generalists, serial specialization is the only broad option
    available to them.

Geer is right: security is hard. It's also very intellectual. It brings
a lot of ideas to the table.

Kevin Mitnick was doing his thing way before CISSP was around. It wasn't
until later that intellectual success (but possibly ethical failure)
stories such as `Adrian
Lamo <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adrian_Lamo>`_, who showed that
expert-level penetration-testing can be done by a hacker-without-a-home,
a simple (possibly even outdated by average technology standards)
laptop, and a web browser.

The reason why Adrian Lamo was so good, the reason why this industry
exists, and the reason why security products fail are all interlinking
problems. The only people who stand to win are the people who cause the
most damage. Security is about damage prevention. Which is why `Ranum is
probably
right <http://searchsecurity.techtarget.com/magazinePrintFriendly/0,296905,sid14_gci1313268,00.html>`_,
although I guess that's an argument for another time.

I sometimes (read: not often enough) work with a handful of people. Most
are specialists -- a world-renown secure code reviewer, one of the
world's best pen-testers (so I hear from even outside my organization),
and an audit/framework/process guru. The generalists in our group (like
myself) are a dying breed. I might also add that at least one of them is
my age and brings an even broader skill-set and expertise to the table
than I do. I consider myself very fortunate. Let me continue with this
train of thinking by bringing us back to what Geer was saying about
specialists vs. generalists:

    Generalists are becoming rare, and they are being replaced by
    specialists. This is speciation inaction, and the narrowing of
    niches. In rough numbers, there are somewhere close to 5,000 various
    technical certifications you can get in the computer field, and the
    number of them is growing thus proving the conjecture of
    specialization [...] will not stop.

Today, I want to continue in the spirit of `The New School of
Information
Security <http://www.tssci-security.com/archives/2008/03/17/implications-of-the-new-school/>`_,
and claim that we don't need expensive certification programs (i.e.
products) that cater only to a certain kind of elite. We need to get
back to basics.

**IT Security certifications available to-date**

You don't need them; I don't have them. Certifications breed
specialization. We need more generalists. Don't get certified and don't
pursue a certification.

Of the people that I work with, only the specialists have
certifications. Note that the guy that is smarter than me (I asked him
to provide input into this) -- he doesn't... and he says that the only
certification that he was ever interested in through his career (I
assume he's been working in this industry for over 10-12 years like
myself) was from SAGE. He says it's no longer offered.

**What is different about the OWASP People Certification Project**

James McGovern wrote on his blog recently about this new project. In his
blog post, `Is it a bad thing that there are no IT security
generalists? <http://duckdown.blogspot.com/2008/06/is-it-bad-thing-that-there-are-no-it.html>`_,
he summarizes his points as follows:

    As an Enterprise Architect, I understand the importance of the
    ability for a security professional to ***articulate risk to IT and
    business executives***, yet I am also equally passionate that
    security professionals should also have the capability to ***sit
    down at a keyboard and actually do something*** as opposed to just
    talking about [it].
    [...] If you are a skilled penetration tester, can write secure code
    and can reverse engineer software, you are worth more than any
    CISSP. For those who embrace the mental disorder of hybridism and
    distillation, ***balance between these two are needed*** where true
    IT security professionals understand both [...]

Can we appease both the voracious business needs and the wrath of the
unstoppable and ever-expanding security learning curve? Is the OWASP
People Certification Project the program that can do this?

If James can truly make this sort of thing happen (and I truly believe
he is doing it and that he can do it -- based on everything I have seen
so far), then I will do my best to ignore the obvious contradictions or
annoyances -- and put my full support behind it.

It's not just James, either. Everyone I've met who has been involved in
the OWASP project has been stellar. The OWASP organization has brought
diverse people together in ways that DefCon/BlackHat, HOPE, Phrack, and
many other grassroot efforts never could.

Will OPCP replace CISSP? Only time will tell, but I will tell you now
that it indeed will. Wait and see.
